_thermo/statistical/generating_function.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Generating function
parent: thermo
nav_order: 1
---

# Bonus: A new take on $Z$ and ensembles

In this "bonus" lecture, we want to further reflect on $Z$, its role and propose alternative ways to derive the ensembles of statistical physics without calling for the maximisation of entropy.

# Generating functions

Now that we saw some fundamental principle on statistical physics, we can try to go a little deeper. The aim of this lecture is to get better insight on what is the partition function $Z$ and why it seems to be such a powerful tool. To do so, we will look at slightly advanced concepts of statistics: moments, cumulents and their generating functions.

## Moments

Moments vs centered moments

### Mean

$$ \langle X \rangle$$

Properties: linearity etc

$$ \langle aX + bY \rangle=  a\langle X \rangle + b\langle Y \rangle $$


$$ \langle XY \rangle =  \langle X \rangle \langle Y \rangle$$

<details>
  <summary><strong>Prooves:</strong> </summary>

</details>


### Variance


## A strange idea: putting moments in a polynomial 

$$p(x) = \mu_0 + \mu_1 x + \mu_2 x^2 + ... = \sum_i \mu_i x^i$$

$$Z(\beta) = \mu_0 - \mu_1 \beta + \frac{\mu_2}{2} \beta^2 -\frac{\mu_3}{6}\beta^3 + ... = \sum_i \frac{1}{\beta !}\mu_i (-\beta)^i$$

$$\mu_i = \left(\frac{\text{d}^i Z }{\text{d} \beta^i} \right)_{\beta=0}$$

Re-expressing the moments as $\mu_i=\langle X^i \rangle$, we get  

$$\mu_0 = \langle X^0 \rangle =1 $$

and 

$$Z(\beta) = 1 - \langle X \rangle \beta + \frac{\langle X^2 \rangle}{2} \beta^2 -\frac{\langle X^3 \rangle}{6}\beta^3 + ... = \sum_i \frac{1}{\beta !}\langle X^i \rangle (-\beta)^i$$

Now recalling that, for any variable $\alpha$, the exponential can be expressed as a polynomial (Taylor expansion) as

$$e^{\alpha} = 1 + X + \frac{1}{2}\alpha^2 +   \frac{1}{6}\alpha^3 + ...$$ 

we can notice that the generating function is almost an exponential for the variable $\alpha = -\beta X$. Using the fact that $\langle aX + bY \rangle = a\langle X \rangle + b \langle Y \rangle$, we can rewrite:

$$ Z(\beta) = \langle e^{-\beta X}\rangle$$

For to the continuous case, this is written

$$ Z(\beta) = \int p(x) e^{-\beta X} \text{d} x $$

Which is the so-called **Laplace transformation** of the function $p(x)$.

**Examples:** die, gaussian

### Central limit theorem

## Cumulents

# Other derivations of the ensembles

## Going further: recommended readings

- Physique statistique (French) - 2nd edition (2024) - C. Texier, G. Roux - Dunod

Commit message:

augmentation of the phase space class

_thermo/statistical/generating_function.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Generating function
parent: thermo
nav_order: 1
---

# Bonus: A new take on $Z$ and ensembles

In this "bonus" lecture, we want to further reflect on $Z$, its role and propose alternative ways to derive the ensembles of statistical physics without calling for the maximisation of entropy.
This lecture is a bit technical (but enlightening!), and might be skipped on a first go through the class.
The statements in this lecture are very general and apply to both the discrete, the continuous and the quantum case, as you can convince yourself easily.

# Other derivations of the ensembles

**fundamental postulate** of statistical physics, in the microcanonical ensemble, all microstates are equiprobable.

$$ p= \frac{1}{\Omega}$$ 

in the continuous case discussed in [this lecture](./phasespace.md), we will see that $\Omega$ correspond to some volume in phase-space.
Probabilities are ratio of size, or of volumes.

$$ p = \frac{\Omega_{\rm sys}}{\Omega_{\rm tot}}$$

# Generating functions

Now that we saw some fundamental principle on statistical physics, we can try to go a little deeper. The aim of this lecture is to get better insight on what is the partition function $Z$ and why it seems to be such a powerful tool. To do so, we will look at slightly advanced concepts of statistics: moments, cumulents and their generating functions.

## Moments

Moments vs centered moments

### Mean

$$ \langle X \rangle$$

Properties: linearity etc

$$ \langle aX + bY \rangle=  a\langle X \rangle + b\langle Y \rangle $$


$$ \langle XY \rangle =  \langle X \rangle \langle Y \rangle$$

<details>
  <summary><strong>Prooves:</strong> </summary>

</details>


### Variance


## A strange idea: putting moments in a polynomial 

$$p(x) = \mu_0 + \mu_1 x + \mu_2 x^2 + ... = \sum_i \mu_i x^i$$

$$Z(\beta) = \mu_0 - \mu_1 \beta + \frac{\mu_2}{2} \beta^2 -\frac{\mu_3}{6}\beta^3 + ... = \sum_i \frac{1}{\beta !}\mu_i (-\beta)^i$$

$$\mu_i = \left(\frac{\text{d}^i Z }{\text{d} \beta^i} \right)_{\beta=0}$$

Re-expressing the moments as $\mu_i=\langle X^i \rangle$, we get  

$$\mu_0 = \langle X^0 \rangle =1 $$

and 

$$Z(\beta) = 1 - \langle X \rangle \beta + \frac{\langle X^2 \rangle}{2} \beta^2 -\frac{\langle X^3 \rangle}{6}\beta^3 + ... = \sum_i \frac{1}{\beta !}\langle X^i \rangle (-\beta)^i$$

Now recalling that, for any variable $\alpha$, the exponential can be expressed as a polynomial (Taylor expansion) as

$$e^{\alpha} = 1 + X + \frac{1}{2}\alpha^2 +   \frac{1}{6}\alpha^3 + ...$$ 

we can notice that the generating function is almost an exponential for the variable $\alpha = -\beta X$. Using the fact that $\langle aX + bY \rangle = a\langle X \rangle + b \langle Y \rangle$, we can rewrite:

$$ Z(\beta) = \langle e^{-\beta X}\rangle$$

For to the continuous case, this is written

$$ Z(\beta) = \int p(x) e^{-\beta X} \text{d} x $$

Which is the so-called **Laplace transformation** of the function $p(x)$.

**Examples:** die, gaussian

### Central limit theorem

## Cumulents


## Going further: recommended readings

- Physique statistique (French) - 2nd edition (2024) - C. Texier, G. Roux - Dunod
