_thermo/thermo.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Thermodynamics and statistical physics
subtitle: Here are some small lectures on selected topics with assiated illustrative codes you can play with.
---

You will find here some fun python applications to physics with some detailled explanations. All codes are stored in [this repository](https://github.com/YoloNomy).

# Thermodynamics

- [Studying a system](../thermo/system/)
- [Studying change: derivative, integrals, differentials](../thermo/calculus/)
- [First law of thermodynamics: energy](../thermo/firstprinciple/)
- [But what is equilibrium?](../thermo/equilibrium/)
- [The ideal gas, part I](../thermo/idealgas/)
- Van der Waals gas
- [Second law of thermodynamics: entropy](../thermo/secondprinciple/)

# Statistical physics

- [Introducing the statistical entropy](../statistical/entropy/)
- [Maximizing the entropy: the canonical ensemble](../statistical/entropy-max/)
- [The ideal gas, part II](../statistical/idealgas/)
- [Grand canonical ensemble](../statistical/grandcanonical/)
- [Thinking in phase space](../statistical/phasespace/)
- [The three principles of thermodynamics](../statistical/principles/)
- [Quantum statistics: fermions and bosons](../statistical/quantumstat/)
- [Fermi gas](../statistical/fermigas/)
- [The blackbody radiation](../statistical/BB/)
- [Out of equilibrium: The Boltzmann equations](../statistical/boltzmann/)

Commit message:

remove inconsistencies in statistical physics

_thermo/thermo.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Thermodynamics and statistical physics
subtitle: Here are some small lectures on selected topics with assiated illustrative codes you can play with.
---

You will find here some fun python applications to physics with some detailled explanations. All codes are stored in [this repository](https://github.com/YoloNomy).

# Thermodynamics

- [Studying a system](../thermo/system/)
- [Studying change: derivative, integrals, differentials](../thermo/calculus/)
- [First law of thermodynamics: energy](../thermo/firstprinciple/)
- [But what is equilibrium?](../thermo/equilibrium/)
- [The ideal gas: the thermodynamics perspective](../thermo/idealgas/)
- Van der Waals gas
- [Second law of thermodynamics: entropy](../thermo/secondprinciple/)
- thermodynamical potentials and phase transitions

# Statistical physics

- [Introducing the statistical entropy](../statistical/entropy/)
- [Maximizing the entropy: the canonical ensemble](../statistical/entropy-max/)
- [Thinking in phase space](../statistical/phasespace/)
- [The ideal gas: the statistical perspective](../statistical/idealgas/)
- [Grand canonical ensemble](../statistical/grandcanonical/)
- [The three principles of thermodynamics](../statistical/principles/)
- [Quantum statistics: fermions and bosons](../statistical/quantumstat/)
- [Fermi gas](../statistical/fermigas/)
- [The blackbody radiation](../statistical/BB/)
- [Out of equilibrium: The Boltzmann equations](../statistical/boltzmann/)
